So back on our page, on the starting page, we have that background image here at the top.
Now it doesn't look that bad but maybe we can enhance the way it looks like, maybe you also like this way
but I would prefer if we would see more of that woman and less of the sky because actually if we have a
look at our original image here,
the freedom image, we see it's way more than just the top left part we're seeing right now. For that
we need to position and size it, both can be done with the background property
if you're using a background image but that's the first thing I want to dive in. Right now we always
used background either with an image or with a solid color,
we use the same notation but background here actually is just a shorthand, we could replace the background
here with background-image
URL
freedom.jpg.
With that if I comment out the first line and I go back to the page and I reload it,
we see the same as before because background-image is how we actually set such an image. On the other
hand when we use a solid color, we use background-color and set this to red
and if you would now expect this color to overwrite the image because it was defined after it, you would
be mistaken. If you reload,
you see the color flash but you also see the image and we have to temporarily remove the image background
to see the solid color because it turns out you can define multiple backgrounds, only one solid color though,
multiple images are possible but we'll dive into this later in the module
and therefore, you can create both an image and a color, the image will be in front of the color though.
However here I don't want to have a color right now,
let's go back to that image and let's find out how we can actually size and position it
because this is not really a style I want to have.
Now there are more background properties we can use and for sizing, background size seems to be appropriate.
Now background size takes a couple of different values,
for example you can simply set it to 100 pixels.
Let's save that and let's see what this results in,
if we reload, we see many small images. Now each image actually has a width of 100 pixels
because if we only set one value here, this refers to the width of the image and by default, it's then
repeated.
Now we can turn off that repeating or control it with background-repeat.
You can set it to no repeat to
don't repeat the image,
now we only got one in the top left corner
or you set it to repeat x, to only repeat the image on the x-axis,
if you now reload, you see there are plenty of images on the x-axis but only in one row because we don't
repeat it on the y-axis and on the other hand there of course also let's also repeat y for cases where
you do want to repeat it on the y-axis.
I don't see that many use cases where you would need that
but if you do, well that's how you do it.
However let's set this back to no repeat and let's increase the width to let's say 300 pixels.
Now if we reload, we can get one bigger image.
It doesn't fit into our container though, so this is not the solution I want to end with.
Before I dive into a solution that works for us here, let me show what you can do
if you set a second value here, let's say to 100 pixels.
If you do that, you set the width and height of the image.
If you don't set it, the height has automatically adjusted to keep the aspect ratio,
if you do set a value here, the image is forced into these dimensions, so it may very well be distorted
and if we reload here, you'll see it is in our case because now, the image does not respect, it does
not keep its original aspect ratio, it's forced into this dimension or into this width and height
we set up here. Now besides pixel values,
you can also set percentage values like 50% for the width.
Now you see if you reload that
actually takes 50% of the available container width,
you can also set it to 100% of course to take the full width.
Now this already looks much better
but just for completeness sake, you could also set the height to 100% and the width to 50 let's say
and if we then have a look at this, now we again have a distorted image but the height is now fit into
the container
and if you don't want to distort it, you can set the first value to auto.
Now the width will be set automatically and it will keep the aspect ratio.
That of course as you can see leads to the image not occupying the full container in our case because
the container happens to have a different aspect ratio in our app
and for most web projects, this will probably be the case,
you rarely have a perfect fit of container and image. Now these were a couple of solutions,
please note that in the case where we had a width of 100% and a height of auto or undefined,
that the image actually takes the full width of the container,
it does not overlap to the left or right but it also does not overlap to the top and bottom, even though
there the image height does not match the container height.
The image is automatically cropped and this is also something we can control, we can control how it is
cropped.
Before we do that though, let's also find out one other way of defining the background size.
Besides manually setting the width and height, you get some predefined keywords and a very useful one
is cover. Cover,
if you reload, essentially does the same as 100% here,
so it sets the width to the container width. However covered does not exactly do that,
cover finds out which part of your container,
so width or height is the important one to be aligned to your image.
Put in other words, our image here actually has an aspect ratio where it's wider than it's high, so it
has landscape mode,
the same is true for our container.
So cover automatically finds out that it should set the width to 100% because the height will
then have some excess space because the image, just as the container, has a height that's less than the
width.
If you had a portrait mode container, the opposite would be the case. Put into other words which make
this clear, cover is a setting that will ensure that your image always fills the entire container,
it will even zoom in if your image is smaller than the container. So cover is the best setting
if you want to ensure that there never is any whitespace anywhere in your container. An alternative to
this is contain. Contain actually ensures that the full image is visible in the container
because right now, the image is cropped,
we don't see all the parts of the image,
this becomes clear if we reload with the sizes set to contain.
Now you see some additional rocks at the bottom of this image.
We also see that
now there is some super whitespace on the right because with contain, what happens is that the image actually
doesn't fill the entire container because contain does not make sure that the entire container is filled,
like cover does,
instead it ensures that the entire image is possible
and if that means that there is some remaining space in the container, so be it.
So contain and cover are two very useful predefined settings which you use instead of manually setting
the size
in many cases, in reality, to control how your image is displayed in the surrounding container.
Now with both contain and cover, we have the case that we might want to position the image because with
cover, we fill the entire container
but if you watch the rocks again, you don't see them here.
Well maybe you want to fill the entire container but show less of the sky and more of the rock,
so of the bottom of our image.
This is something we can control with background position,
so let's dive into this in the next video.